A Sample Ethernet Application (tutorial)
----------------------------------------

This tutorial describes a demo included in the xmos ethernet
package. The demo can be found in the directory app_ethernet_demo and
provides a simple ethernet application that responds to ICMP ping
requests. It assumes a basic knowledge of XC programming. For
information on XMOS programming, you can find reference material about
XC programming at the `XMOS website <http://www.xmos.com/support/documentation>`_.

To write an ethernet enabled application for an XMOS device requires
several things:

  #. Write a Makefile for our application
  #. Provide an ethernet_conf.h configuration file
  #. Provide a custom filter function
  #. Write the application code that uses the component


Makefile
++++++++

The Makefile is found in the top level directory of the
application. It uses the general XMOS makefile in module_xmos_common
which compiles all the source files in the application and the modules
that the application uses. We only have to add a couple of
configuration options.

Firstly, this application is for an XC-2 development board so the
TARGET variable needs to be set in the Makefile.
 
::
 
  # The TARGET variable determines what target system the application is 
  # compiled for. It either refers to an XN file in the source directories
  # or a valid argument for the --target option when compiling.

  TARGET = XC-2

Secondly, the application will use the ethernet module (and the locks
module which is required by the ethernet module). So we state that the
application uses these.

:: 

  # The USED_MODULES variable lists other module used by the application. 

  USED_MODULES = module_ethernet module_locks

Given this information, the common Makefiles will build all the files
in the required modules when building the application. This works from
the command line (using xmake) or from Eclipse.

ethernet_conf.h
+++++++++++++++

The ethernet_conf.h file is found in the src/ directory of the
application. This file contains a series of #defines that configure
the ethernet stack. The possible #defines that can be set are
described in :ref:`sec_conf_defines`.

Within this application we set the maximum packet size we can receive
to be the maximum possible allowed in the ethernet standard and set
the number of buffers to be 5 packets for incoming packets and 5 for
outgoing.

The maximum number of ethernet clients (chanends we can connect to the
ethernet server) is set to 4 (even though we only have one client in
this example).

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/ethernet_conf.h


mac_custom_filter
+++++++++++++++++

The mac_custom_filter function allows use to decide which packets get
passed through the MAC. To do this, we have to provide the
mac_custom_filter.h header file and a definition of the
mac_custom_filter function itself.

The header file in this example just prototypes the mac_custom_filter
function itself. 

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/mac_custom_filter.h

The module requires the application to provide the header to cater for
the case where the function is describe as an inline function for
performance. In this case it is just prototyped and the definition of
mac_custom_filter is in our main application code file demo.xc


.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc 
  :start-after: //::custom-filter
  :end-before: //::


This function returns 0 if we do not want to handle the packet and
non-zero otherwise. The non-zero value is used later to distribute to
different clients. In this case we detect ARP packets and ICMP packets
which match our own mac address as a destination. In this case the
function returns 1. The defintions os is_broadcast, is_ethertype and
is_mac_addr are in demo.xc

Top level program structure
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Now that we have the basic ethernet building blocks, we can build our
application. This application is contained in demo.xc. Within this
file is the main() function which declares some variables (primarily
XC channels). It also contains a top level par construct which sets
the various functional units running that make up the program.

On core 2 we run the ethernet server. First, the function :c:func:`ethernet_getmac_otp` reads the device mac address from ROM. The
function :c:func:`phy_init` initializes the phy and them the main function
:c:func:`ethernet_server` runs the ethernet component. The server
communicates with other threads via the rx and tx channel arrays.

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc 
  :start-after: //::ethernet
  :end-before: //::

On core 0 we run the demo() function which takes ethernet packets and
responds to ICMP ping requests. This function is described in the next section.

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc 
  :start-after: //::demo
  :end-before: //::


Ethernet packet processing
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The demo() function does the actual ethernet packet processing. First
the application gets the device mac address from the ethernet server
on core 2.

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc
   :start-after: //::get-macaddr
   :end-before: //::


Then the packet filter is set up. The mask value passed to
:c:func:`mac_set_custom_filter` is used within the mac. After the
custom_mac_filter function is run, if the result is non-zero then the
result is and-ed against the mask. If this is non-zero then the packet
is forwarded to the client.

So in this case, the mask is 1 so all packets that get a 1 result from
custom_mac_filter function will get passed to this client.


.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc
   :start-after: //::setup-filter
   :end-before: //::

After we are set up to receive the correct packets we can go into the
main loop that responds to ARP and ICMP packets.

The first task in the loop is to receive a packet into the rxbuf
buffer using the :c:func:`mac_rx` function.

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc
   :start-after: //::mainloop
   :end-before: //::

When the packet is received it may be an ARP or IP packet since both
get past our filter. First we check if it is an ARP packet, if so then
we build the response (in the txbuf array) and send it out over
ethernet using the :c:func:`mac_tx` function. The functions
is_valid_arp_packet and build_arp_response are defined demo.xc.

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc
   :start-after: //::arp_packet_check
   :end-before: //::

If the packet is not an ARP packet we check if it is an ICMP packet
and in the same way build a response and send it out. 

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc
   :start-after: //::icmp_packet_check
   :end-before: //::

Running the application
+++++++++++++++++++++++

To test the application the following define in demo.xc needs to be
set to an IP address that is routable in the network that the
application is to be tested on.

.. literalinclude:: app_ethernet_demo/src/demo.xc
   :start-after: //::ip_address_define
   :end-before: //::

Once this is done, the demo can be compiled and the XC-2 connected to
a PC. Pinging the IP address defined should now get a response e.g.::

 PING 192.168.0.3 (192.168.0.3) 56(84) bytes of data.
 64 bytes from 192.168.0.3: icmp_seq=1 ttl=64 time=2.97 ms
 64 bytes from 192.168.0.3: icmp_seq=2 ttl=64 time=2.93 ms
 64 bytes from 192.168.0.3: icmp_seq=3 ttl=64 time=2.91 ms
 64 bytes from 192.168.0.3: icmp_seq=4 ttl=64 time=2.96 ms
 ...
  
  
